
--- FILE: QLIP-Impact-Session-Plans-Case-Study.docx ---


Impact Measurement

What are these tools?
To better measure our collective impact, we have developed a new Impact Measurement Framework, which lists key outcome areas and indicators to help us understand the impact of our work. 
We have developed various tools to support youth practitioners to understand their impact on young people. You may have used other tools before, like feedback forms or surveys. These tools are designed to fit better into your existing youth provision, getting young people actively engaged in sharing the impact they have experienced. 
The tools allow you to explore different outcome areas through different methods: 
a case study interview;
a survey, followed by a group debrief; and 
two creative sessions that can be conducted in a group setting.
We hope that these tools will encourage your organisation to explore and understand the impact you have had, and provide you with new evidence around what is working well and what could work even better to align with young people’s needs. 

Important notes
The delivery and reporting of these sessions is completely voluntary, however, by sharing your experiences with QLIP you will contribute to the overall understanding of youth work impact in Islington, as well as help develop better and more accessible impact evaluation processes for other youth organisations.

You are free to adapt the sessions and/or the questions suggested, as long as they relate to the same outcome area and outcomes. We are very happy to provide one-to-one guidance to help you use these tools – click here to set up an informal chat and we can support you to find ways to make the tools work for you and your delivery.

If you have interest and capacity, you are also welcome to use and adapt the QLIP Impact Measurement Framework according to your organisation’s ways of working and existing impact evaluation processes and create your own sessions and tools.

The QLIP Impact Measurement Framework has guidance on consent, data privacy, and ethics with regards to these data collection tools and approaches. It is recommended that you review these in detail and develop your own consent and data privacy protocols as well as ethical guidelines which you would like to use to inform any data collection processes. This should be done prior to beginning any data collection activities.

It is possible that safeguarding concerns may be raised in the course of conducting these activities. Please make sure that whoever is conducting the activity is aware of your organisation’s safeguarding procedures and is ready to support young people who might need it.









Tool 1 – Understanding individual journeys
Case study interview (1:1)

The first tool presented in this toolkit is the case study interview, which is to be conducted with one young person at a time to understand their individual experience of engaging with a youth work organisation, and the impact youth work has had on them. 
As a first step, you will need to identify whose story you or your team want to explore. While it is completely up to your team to decide who to invite to participate, there are several questions you can ask yourself in this process:
Do we have a relatively honest and trusting relationship with this young person? Alternatively, do we feel that the format of the 1:1 interview could allow this young person to open up and build this relationship?
How long has this young person been involved with our organisation? For case studies, it might be more beneficial to speak to those who have been with the organisation for a longer time to allow them to explore the long-term impact of youth work.
From our observations, has this person gone through any sort of small and big changes since their first attendance of our organisation? If yes, an interview might be a good opportunity to explore how those changes came to being (e.g. what was the contribution of youth work) and what is the meaning of those changes to the young person.
Finally, is this young person likely to only share positive experiences and/or what they expect the youth workers to hear? If so, the young person might need some preparation or additional encouragement to also share what was not so easy or great in their experience of youth work (this also relates to the point around trusting relationships).
Below are the specific outcomes and indicators that this interview script was designed to explore:

Note: This conversation should be followed up by the youth worker presenting some options of where the young person can find support for their wellbeing, mental and emotional health (in or beyond your organisation), and might potentially require additional signposting. 
If you can identify a way to include other indicators, please do so. Have a look through the QLIP Impact Measurement Framework here and adapt questions below.
Introduction
This semi-structured interview script is an example of how to explore the impact of youth work on a young person’s wellbeing and confidence. As this is an individual interview, the exact phrasing of questions might depend on the specific young person you are speaking to; you might also skip or add questions as you see needed during the interview. 
What you need
Time: Approximately 40-60 minutes for the interview 
Space: A space within your youth centre where the young person can feel safe sharing their thoughts; it shouldn’t be a space where there are many distractions or the young person can easily be overheard
Materials: While no specific materials are needed, it is advised that the youth worker takes some notes during the interview; you can also have some paper and pens nearby in case the young person prefers to draw or scribble while speaking.
Recommended process 
Part 1 - Preparation
Once you have selected one or a few young people you would like to speak to, we suggest speaking to them and asking if they would like to take part. Explain what the conversation will be about, why you are interested to hear from them, stressing that this is totally voluntary, they have the right to skip any or all questions and how you will use what you learn from them (e.g., ‘I will take notes during our chat, and then share a summary of what I have learned with the rest of the team so we can learn from your experience with us and make our organisation work better’). Follow the consent processes provided by QLIP or your organisation to ensure you get informed consent from the young person. Let them know that you’ll be sharing notes with us, but that we won’t use their name or anything that could identify them in anything published.
At the agreed time, reiterate what this conversation will be about and what rights they have. The young person has the right to change their mind at any point and/or not answer any of the questions, if they don’t feel comfortable sharing. 
 Part 2 – Suggested interview script
The script below offers an example of how to lead an interview with a young person, however, based on each individual young person and the flow of the conversation, you might want to adapt, skip or add questions, including any prompts or examples to help them think of the answers. For example, if your organisation primarily does one-to-one work or mentoring, you could adapt the questions to focus on how they found out about your programme and how they experienced their first session(s). You may also want to offer the young person to draw their answers and then speak about them. 
Opening questions (10-15 mins)
When did you first come to this youth centre? How did you find out about it?
Do you remember your first day/afternoon here? What do you remember about it?
Do you like this youth centre now? What do you like about it? What do you not like about it?
When you think about yourself back then and now, do you think you have changed in any way? For example, have you learned any new skills, have you taken up any new hobbies, made any new friends? 
Questions on confidence and goals (10 mins)
How confident do you feel in yourself, your skills and abilities? What helps you feel more confident?
Do you have any short-term or long-term goals? If yes, can you share some of them with me?
Are you currently working towards your goals, and if yes, how? Do you feel you will be successful in achieving them?
What is something that you have done (here or outside the youth centre) that you feel proud of?
Questions on problem solving and resilience (10 mins)
How do you feel and react when you encounter a new problem? How do you approach it?
How do you feel when something goes wrong, or you make a mistake? What helps you feel better?
Questions on well-being and sense of safety (10 mins)
Overall, how happy are you with your life at this current moment? What makes you happy the most?
If you remember yourself a year ago, do you now feel more or less happy? Why?
If you needed help, would you talk about your wellbeing at this youth club (e.g. with youth workers)? Why/why not?
Do you feel physically safe when spending time at this youth club? Why/why not?
Note: This conversation should be followed up by youth worker presenting some options of where the young person can find support for their wellbeing, mental and emotional health (in or beyond your organisation), and might potentially require additional signposting. 
Part 3 – Reflection
To understand the impact of youth work on the young person you spoke to, you will need to return to your notes and review them. The questions suggested in the script are open, however, there are several indications that the young person has experienced positive impact as a result of attending your service (for more, see the full QLIP Impact Measurement Framework), for example:
They reflect on positive changes in their personal lives that have happened since them joining the youth centre
They attribute certain changes to the youth centre directly, e.g. feeling more confident due to being able to take up new activities at the youth centre; they see activities at the youth centre directly or indirectly contributing to their goals
They see the youth centre as a source of support, e.g., when faced with a new problem, they feel they can ask youth workers for advice
They feel emotionally and physically safe at the youth centre (questions 13 and 14)
The interview may also serve as an opportunity to learn about young people’s needs and how can the centre improve its work to align better with them, for example, learning what makes young people feel most proud or where do they seek support when needed. If you want to develop and write a full case study to use for reporting to QLIP or showcasing your work externally, there are numerous tools available to support you in this process, for example:
How to write a case study that wins hearts and minds
Writing engaging charity case studies
How to write impactful case studies
There is also an opportunity, if your capacity allows, to hold such interviews with the same young people over a longer period of time (e.g., once a year) to observe long-term changes and impact on young people. 


































--- FILE: QLIP-MEL-Framework-v3-Feb23.pdf ---

Islington Impact Measurement Framework
V3 - February 2023
Developed by QLIP in partnership with The Social Investment Consultancy
Please contact ruth.virgo@londonyouth.org with questions or for support
What are the tabs for?
Overview An overview of the document, outcomes and Young Islington's Theory of Change
A. Guidance In detail explains how to use the framework
B. MEL Framework The full MEL framework that can be filtered according to your needs
C. Case study interview Guidance for conducting case study interviews
D. Survey Guidance for conducting surveys
E. Group discussion Guidance for conducting group discussions
F. Creative Guidance for using creative methods
G. Observation Guidance for using observation
H. Learning Suggested structure for the learning sessions within the organisation
I. Consent Guidance for getting informed consent from young people
J. Ethics of research Guidance on research ethics
Young Islington's Theory of Change
Improved physical health Improved practical and life skills
Improved emotional well-being Improved social skills
Improved sense of safety Improved self-awareness
Improved resilience Increased learning
Increased sense of ownership Improved connections with others
Increased confidence Improved connections with communities
Improved aspirations and ambitions Improved access to servicesSense of agency and motivationConnections with networks of 
support and communitiesUnderstanding the impact of youth work: 
QLIP MEL Framework
This document was created by the QLIP team with the support of the London 
Borough of Islington to support youth work organisations in understanding their 
impact on young people. We hope that this document will provide you with clear 
structure and guidance on how to measure your impact so that it can be celebrated 
and shared with the wider sector.
Based on the Young Islington's Theory of Change (see on the right) and the 
workshop held with the QLIP Core group, we have identified 4 key outcome areas 
of youth work  for young people that make up the essence of this MEL Framework. 
We hope that these outcome areas will resonate with the majority of youth work 
providers across Islington, regardless of their specific day-to-day activities or target 
audiences. 
Social, emotional and life skills 
and knowledgePhysical and emotional well-
being

How to use this framework
•   What areas of impact you will be working in •   What you think is possible for you to collect data on •   How these tools will fit with the existing practices and processes within your organisation
•   What activities you will be doing within each of these areas •   Which indicators fit best with the ethos of your organisation •   How the young people you work with will respond to the different tools
•   What are the potential short, medium and long term outcomes of these activities •   Which indicators are best for the story you want to tell as an organisation •   The capacity of staff to deliver these data collection tools including their skills but also time they have available
•   Which outcomes are the most important for you to measure
Next steps and suggestions
You may need to review the order of questions once you have created your data collection tool to ensure there is a flow.
Depending on which tool you are choosing to use and the frequency of data collection you will need to consider the following:
•   Do you need a baseline?
•   When and how will you collect the data?
•   How will you store the data?
Learning
Sharing the data with QLIP
Framework glossary
Broad area of impact on young people 
Outcomes Specific changes in young people's behaviours, attitudes or feelings 
Indicators Specific measures that can be tracked to understand whether a change has been achieved
If you have any thoughts on this please do share with us. Data collection tools Methods that help measure the indicators
Source of information Audience to collect the data from
Example questions Questions suggested to use for specific indicators
Type of response Type of response you should be aiming to collect
Examples of indicative answers Examples of answers that indicate that the outcome has been fully or partially achieved
Comments Notes or guidance to consider for specific data collection tools or indicators
YO Youth organisation
YP Young people/young person
YW Youth workerCan the question be easily understood and answered (e.g. yes/no 
questions, short answers) or does it require a deeper conversation? 
There also might be additional considerations for the specific youth groups 
that your organisation is working with, e.g. different age groups might 
require different phrasing, however, we trust your expertise and judgement 
on how to best speak to the young people you work with! Moving forwards, 
this framework will be developed further and new considerations might be 
added as we learn collectively from this process. 2. Once you have shortlisted the relevant outcomes for your work, using the MEL Framewor k in Tab B, select the most 
relevant indicators to your work. There are multiple indicators for each outcome and not all will be relevant to your work. 
In this conversation you should consider:3. The final stage is to look at the data collection tools . Each indicator has its corresponding data 
collection approaches, including sources, tools, questions, and answer types (B . MEL Framework 
tab). There are five different types of data collection approaches for each indicator: case study 
interview, survey, group discussion, creative and observation. When selecting the data collection 
approaches it is important to consider:
The framework has been designed for you to be able to use filters to be able to create your own 
bespoke MEL framework so please do filter the framework as you work through these steps.1.        Using the Theory of Change in the Overview  tab review and discuss all of the outcomes  with 
your team. Select the ones that you think apply most appropriately to your work. You will need to 
discuss:
Important: while the data collection tools suggested for each indicator are 
recommended, we advise you to consider the following when adapting 
the framework:
Is this question better asked in a group or an individual setting? (e.g., will 
young people feel comfortable sharing this information with their peers?) ?
Does the answer to the question potentially require a follow-up from the 
youth workers? (e.g., questions on emotional wellbeing, sense of safety) 
These questions should not be included in an anonymous survey ?
?
We will be discussing this with providers over the next month to find out how the best way for this to happen is and what we 
can ask of you as youth work providers.Outcome areaThe framework provides advice on the questions and frequency of data collection so using the framework and the outcomes, 
indicators and data collection tools selected, you can extract the relevant questions to create your bespoke tools e.g. paste 
each of the group discussion questions you have selected into a group discussion guide.
You should also include the relevant  introduction and consent protocols  to the tools before you start using them. If you 
would like any support on what to include here please do let us know.
Monitoring and evaluation is not just about accountability but also an opportunity to learn for the organisation, seeking 
opportunities to maximise impact. As such we have included a structure to support this process in your organisation in Tab H . 
Learning.
QLIP has been asked by Islington Council to report on the work of youth work providers across the borough. As such we 
would appreciate it if you can share with us the data. 

Outcome area Outcomes IndicatorsCase study 
interviewSurveyGroup 
discussionCreative ObservationSource of 
informationExample questions Type of responseExamples of indicative 
answersOptional follow up questions Comments
X X YPHow much do you enjoy physical activities/sport? What is your 
favourite physical or sport activity?Open(Very) enjoyable; able to name 
favourite activity(-ies); shares 
examples of engaging with sport Only applicable to YOs that have physical activities and/or sport within 
their programme
X X YP How much do you enjoy physical activities/sport? Rate from 1 to 10. 1-10 scale 7 or above As above
X YPDo you feel you are more physically active than you were 6 months 
ago? Yes/No/Don't know Yes - Why do you think that is? As above
X X YPHave you started any new physical activities/sport since you joined the 
youth club? What have you started doing and why?OpenYes; able to name activities and 
explain why it attracted themAs above
1.1c Number of YP taking part in sport activities in YO in the last 6/9/12 months X YO N/A N/AStable or increasing numbers over 
timeAs above
YOs are free to choose the time period they are reporting
1.1d YP report an increase in healthy eating habits X YPDo you feel you are now eating more healthily than you were 6 months 
ago? Yes/No/Don't know YesOnly applicable if the YO is intentionally working with encouraging 
healthy eating habits. 
Requires a definition of healthy eating 
1.1e YP are able to name healthy eating habits that they have taken up X X YPHave you taken up any new healthy eating habits since you joined the 
youth club? What have you started doing and why?Open Yes, able to name specific habits - Why do you think that is? As above
1.2a Number of 1:1 conversations with YP around their well-being in the last 6/9/12 months X YO N/A N/A- How many times have YP asked for help when they 
needed it?
- How many referrals have been made to other more 
focused organisations?These conversations can be initiated by both YP and YW
1.2b YP have access tools and resources to manage their mental health X X X YPDo you know where to go if you need help with your mental 
health/wellbeing? How did you learn about it?Yes/No/Don't know, OpenYes; attributes learning about 
support to YO; able to name specific 
resources or support- How would you say your sleep/other related 
concepts are?
1.2c YP report feeling satisfied with their life X X X YPHow happy are you with your life at this current moment? How happy 
are you in comparison to 6/9/12 months ago?OpenHappy or happier; content; satisfied; 
shares examples of positive things 
that have happened To present this question in group settings, YP should have the choice 
to share their answers anonymously (e.g. through post-it notes, 
drawings, photographs)
X YPWould you talk about your mental health/wellbeing at your youth club 
(e.g. with youth workers)? Why/why not?Yes/No, OpenYes; able to name reasons or 
examplesNote: if the YP does not feel like they can talk about their wellbeing 
BUT is able to explain why or give examples, it can show their higher 
self-awareness (Outcome 2.2)
X YPWould you talk about your mental health/wellbeing at your youth club 
(e.g. with youth workers)? Why/why not?Yes/No/Don't know, OpenYes; able to name reasons of 
examplesAs above
1.3b YP feel that YO is a physically safe space to spend time at X X YPDo you feel physically safe when spending time at your youth club? 
Why/why not?Yes/No/Don't know, Open YesThe YO should be prepared to address concerns if YP say that they 
do not feel physically safe (e.g., an anonymous survey might not be a 
good tool to ask this question)
1.3c YP are able to reflect on what helps them to feel physically and emotionally safe at the YO X YPWhen do you feel safe at your youth club? What helps you feel safe at 
your youth club? Open Able to name reasons and examples As above (both related to emotional and physical safety)
1.4a YP report being able to solve problems X X X YPHow do you feel when you encounter a new problem? How do you 
approach it?OpenTaking action/initiative to tackle the 
problem, finding support from others; 
asking for help
1.4b YP report developing healthy coping strategies X X X YPHow do you feel when something goes wrong, or you make a mistake? 
What helps you feel better?OpenLearning from mistakes; Optimistic; 
Trying again; identifies specific 
things that help them feel better
2.1a YP are able to name skills they have learned X X X X YP Have you learned any of the following skills at your youth club? Yes/No/Don't know, Tick listYes; tick off those from list of 
tangible and intangible skills- Have you learnt anything else through attending 
youth club?
- How have you used these skills elsewhere?
2.1b Number of YP attending skill-based workshops or activities within YO in the last 6/9/12 months X YO N/A N/A
X X YPHow well do you understand your own emotions and feelings? What 
has helped you to learn about yourself?Open(Very) well; able to share examples 
of what helped to learn about 
themselves (e.g. YO activities, YWs, 
new people)This may only be suitable for older YP who are able to reflect on their 
emotions.
X YPHow well do you understand your own emotions and feelings? Rate 
from 1 to 10.1-10 scale 7 or above
2.2b YP are able to name their personal strengths X X YPWhat are your three personal strengths? Tell me how you apply them 
day-to-day.OpenAble to name three strengths and 
explain how they are able to use 
them in daily situations
X X X YPDo you feel your communication skills have improved as a result of 
attending your youth club? If yes, can you share an example?OpenYes; able to talk about specific skills 
and/or scenarios where they were 
better at communicationCommunication skills can include listening, empathy, sharing your 
opinion, teamwork, conflict resolution, respect, friendliness, tolerance
X YPDo you feel your communication skills have improved as a result of 
attending your youth club? Yes/No/Don't know Yes
2.3b YP report feeling comfortable working in a group X X YP How did you feel during this group exercise? OpenWell; comfortable; myself; confident; 
happy- Why do you think that was?
2.3c YP work well in a group X YOHow did young people work in a group during this exercise? Have you 
seen any improvements over time in this group?OpenCollaboration; resolving conflicts 
efficiently; distributing work; 
listening; respectfully- Have the YP put themselves forward for other group 
activities?For an alternative way of measuring teamwork skills, see CFYI 
questionnaires (Adult and YP version, questions/statements under 
Teamwork section): 
https://www.youthimpact.uk/key-resources/measurement-hub/adult-
rating-youth-behaviour-aryb
https://www.youthimpact.uk/key-resources/measurement-hub/youth-
rating-socio-emotional-skills-yrss
2.4a YP gain accreditation or recognition of their achievements X X YP, YOWhat have been some of your achievements since you joined the 
youth club?Open Shares examples of recognition In and beyond YO
YP might share this informally 
X X X X YPIs there anything at the moment that you would like to learn more 
about? What is it?OpenShares specific interests/areas of 
interest
X YOHave you observed young people taking interest in improving their 
current or learning new skills? If yes, please share some examples.OpenYWs are able to name examples of 
YP taking up learning opportunities
3.1a YP report they feel involved in shaping youth work X X YPHow involved do you feel in shaping the activities at your youth club? If 
yes, please share some examples.OpenFeel involved; feel listened to; YWs 
understand what we want or need; 
able to share specific examples- Is there anything else you would like to get involved 
in?
It can also include resources that the YO has
3.1b Number of YP who take responsibilities within the youth club over the last 6/9/12 months X YO N/A N/AResponsibilities can be defined by the YO, but they can include 
proactively supporting YWs on events/activities, coordinating peers, 
initiating new activities etc.
3.2a YP report feeling able to achieve their goals x x X YPWhat are some goals that you have (short- or long-term)? Are you 
working towards them, and if so, how? Do you feel you will be 
successful in achieving them?OpenAble to name some goals and steps 
they are taking towards it; they feel 
positive or confident about achieving 
them - Is there any way  [youth club] can help?If YP shares some goals but say they do not feel they can achieve 
them, it is recommended to discuss what makes them feel this way 
and are there any specific barriers that can be addressed.
3.2b YP report an increase in confidence X X X YPHow confident do you feel in yourself? What helps you feel more 
confident?Open(Mostly) confident, talks about 
specific situations or factors that 
help them feel more confident. 
Attributes increase in confidence to 
attending YOIf YP struggle with this question, can ask them to imagine how 
confident they feel in specific situations, e.g. meeting new people, 
doing new things, achieving goals
3.2c YP are able to name something they are proud of X X X YP What is something that you have done that you are proud of? OpenAble to name specific things they are 
proud of
3.2d Percentage of YP who speak up and share their opinions in a group X X X YO N/A N/A Over 75% 
X X X YPHow do you feel about trying new things (for example, new activities 
offered at your youth club)?Open Excited; intrigued; confident - Is there any way  [youth club]  can help?
X YPHow do you feel about trying new things (for example, new activities 
offered at your youth club)?
For YP with additional needs this Q might be rephrased to:
How do you feel about trying new things (for example, new activities 
offered at your youth club) with your youth worker ?a) Very excited b) 
Somewhat excited c) I 
don't feel anything in 
particular; d) Cautious; 
e) Worried or very 
worriedVery excited or somewhat excited
3.3b YP report having tried new things in the last 6/9/12 months and are able to name specific 
examplesX X YPHave you tried any new things (for example, new activities offered at 
your youth club, new hobbies or learning opportunities) in the last 
6/9/12 months? If so, what were they?OpenAre able to name specific new things 
that they have tried or taken upActivities or things in mind should be seen as positive and contributing 
to YP's quality of life to some extent
3.3c Number of YP who took up new education, training and employment (ETE) opportunities in 
the last 6/9/12months (outside YO) X YO N/A N/AOpportunities include ETE: career-, education-, hobby- related 
opportunities
3.3d Number of YP taking leadership roles within YO in the last 6/9/12 months X YO N/A N/ALeadership roles can include leading on activities or events, initiating 
projects, taking up leadership opportunities
X X X YPHow connected do you feel to people in your life? How connected do 
you feel to people in your youth club?OpenConnected; close; talks about 
specific relationships and friendships 
they value
X X X YPHow connected do you feel to people in your life / in your youth club? 
Please rate from 1 to 10 and tell us more about it. Scale from 1 to 10; Open7 or above; talks about connections 
they valueIf YP shares they do not have close friendships or relationships, YW 
should follow this up to check on their wellbeing
X X YPHow supportive are your youth workers? If yes, can you tell about a 
specific  time they supported you?OpenFeels supported, included, values 
relationships with YWYP might feel hesitant to speak about YWs if they are the ones asking 
the question - hesitancy might implicate they do not feel fully 
supported.
XHow supportive are your youth workers? Please rate from 1 to 10 and 
tell us more about it. Scale from 1 to 10; Open7 or above, talks about what they 
value in the relationships with YW
4.1c YP feel that they can ask for help and advice within their youth club X X X YPIf you were faced with a problem (at school, with your friends, with 
your hobbies), where would you look for help? OpenMention of YO or Yws or peers at 
YO
4.1d Number of YP who have proactively reached out for help or advice at YO in the last 6/9/12 
monthsX YO N/A N/A Help or advice in regards to school/education, relationships, hobbies, 
goals. Could also include YP who accepted help when offered.
4.1e YP report having made new friends X X X YPHave you made any new friends as a result of attending the youth 
club? Can you tell me about them?OpenHave made friends, can talk about 
them a little bitThis question might require a sensitive approach if asked in group 
settings; potentially anonymous methods are more suitable (e.g. post-it 
notes). If any YP seem distressed, YW should follow this up to check 
on their wellbeing
4.1f YP report feeling comfortable meeting and spending time with people that are different from 
themX X X YPHow do you feel about meeting and spending time with people who are 
different from you? This could be someone of a different age to you, a 
different religion, another culture etc. Can you share some examples, 
if you have any?Open Excited; intrigued; comfortable - Why do you think you feel this way?
4.1g YP report knowing how to solve interpersonal conflicts X X X YPIf you had a conflict with someone in your life, how would you 
approach it?OpenKnows some specific constructive 
ways of solving a conflict
4.1h YP are able to solve conflicts within YO (with or without YW help) X X YO N/A N/AYWs are able to name examples of 
YP solving conflicts within YOIt is up to observing YWs judgement to decide whether the group of 
YP is able to solve arising conflicts
X X X YPHow connected do you feel to the local community/Islington? What 
helps you to feel more connected?OpenConnected; in touch; part of it; talks 
about the role of YO
xHow connected do you feel to the local community/Islington? Please 
rate from 1 to 10. Can you tell us more about it?Scale from 1 to 10; Open 7 and above, able to explain why
4.2b YP report wanting to help or give back to the local community X X X X YPIs there anything you would like to do to help the local 
community/Islington? If so, what?Yes/No/Don't know; OpenYes; able to name at least one thing 
they would like to contribute
4.3a Number of signposting/referral cases to other services in the community in the last 6/9/12 
monthsX YO N/A N/AIncludes other YOs, GP, community centres, charities. Where 
possible, collect data on types of referrals/examples
4.3b % of YP who take advantage of the referrals and signposting X YP, YO N/A N/A Over 50% Needs following up from 4.3a- Why do you say this?2.3
Improved social skills
4.2a YP report feeling connected to the local community2.2a YP report understanding their emotions and feelings well 
2.3a YP report improved communication skills
2.4
Increased learning
3.3a YP report willingness to try new things 
4.1a YP report feeling connected to others
4.1b YP feel that the youth workers are supportive and can provide examples2.1
YP gain practical and life skills
2.2
Improved self-awareness
3
 YP have a higher sense of 
agency and motivation3.1
Sense of ownership within youth work
3.2
Increased confidence
3.3 
Improved aspirations and ambitions, 
including education, training and 
employment (ETE)
4
 YP have strengthened 
connections with networks of 
support and communities4.1
Improved connections with others
4.2
Improved connections with communities
4.3
Improved access to services- Why do you say that?
- Do you play the sport here or somewhere else?
- Why do you enjoy it/not enjoy it do you think?
2
 YP have increased social, 
emotional and life skills and 
knowledge
2.4b YP demonstrate interest in improving current and/or learning new skills1.1a YP report they enjoy taking part in physical activities/sport
1.1b YP report an increase in physical activity 1.1
Improved physical health
- Why do you think that is?1.2
Improved emotional well-being
Note: These questions and conversations 
should be followed up by YW presenting 
options of where YP can find support for 
their wellbeing, mental and emotional 
health (in or beyond YO)
1.3a YP feel that YO is a safe space to talk about their well-being
1.3 Improved sense of safety 1
YP have better physical and 
emotional well-being
1.4
Improved resilience
Delivering case studies
In order to deliver a case study interview you should consider the following steps:
1.     Decide what you want to showcase through the case study.
2.     Select the young person you want the case study to focus on.
6.     Ensure the young person has the opportunity to ask any questions about the process.
7.     Conduct the interview with the young person ensuring they feel comfortable at all stages.
9.     Share the draft case study with the young person to get their feedback and approval.
10.   Share the case study with colleagues to get their feedback.
11.   Finalise the case study.3.     Select the relevant questions based on your understanding of them and their journey at the 
centre. At this stage avoid biasing the case study by selecting only the outcomes that you think 
the young person will have something positive to say on.
4.     Decide on the format of the case study. It could be a video, an audio file or a written case 
study. This will dictate how you record the interview.
5.     Find a safe space to conduct the interview and introduce the process to the young person, 
ensure they understand what will be happening, how the final product will be used and what is 
expected of them.
8.     Edit the content of the case study to tell the story you are want to tell. This can include 
structuring it according to outcomes or telling the story of the journey of the young person. 
Delivering a survey
In order to design and deliver a survey you should consider the following steps:
1.        Once you have designed the survey using the questions in your framework, decide who you will 
be issuing the survey too. This may depend on the age groups or when the young people started 
attending the centre or a specific demographic group you have identified as wanting more information 
on. Depending on whether you will be conducting these surveys as baseline, midline or endline it may 
be important to consider what additional information you might need as part of this.
2.        Decide how you will issue the survey e.g. emailing to young people, asking them to fill in when 
they arrive at the centre or issuing paper copies as part of an activity. This will dictate what tech you 
will need, what format you need to have the survey in and how long the data collection period will be. 
There are a lot of free survey softwares you can use including Google Forms and Survey Monkey.
3.        Once you have issued the survey and collected all the data you will need to collate all the 
responses and conduct data analysis. This will help you identify trends and anomalies within the data 
and build a better picture of where the young people you are working with are.
Delivering a group discussion
In order to design and deliver a group discussion you should consider the following steps:
1.        Decide what you want to discuss in the group discussion
6.        Ensure the young people has the opportunity to ask any questions about the process.
8.        Once you have conducted the discussion you will need to conduct data analysis. This will help you 
identify trends and anomalies within the data and build a better picture of where the young people you are 
working with are.2.        Select the young people that you want to include in the group discussion. Consider ages, genders 
and personalities within the group. You may want to keep it small to allow each child to feel safe and 
heard, this could be three young people.
3.        Select the questions you want to ask the group. At this stage be realistic about what they might feel 
comfortable answering in a group setting and how many questions will be appropriate to ask to ensure it 
doesn’t go on for too long.
4.        Decide how you will record the case study, either by taking notes or recording it on audio or video 
format. 
5.        Find a safe space to conduct the group discussion and introduce the process to the young people, 
ensure they understand what will be happening, how the final product will be used and what is expected of 
them.
7.        Conduct the group discussion with the young people ensuring they feel comfortable at all stages.
Introduction
Methods
There is a wide variety of creative activities that can be used as methods of evaluation, including:
Taking photographs
Drawing or painting
Scrapbooking or collages
Asking to choose visual stimuli that reflect their experiences (e.g., Dixit cards, postcards, cut-outs from magazines)
Asking to choose audio stimuli that reflect their experiences
Writing
ExamplesWithin this framework, there is also scope to use creative data collection methods to understand the impact of youth work on young people. There are several 
benefits to using creative methods: 1) they are more engaging and interactive than traditional data collection tools; 2) they allow young people to 'talk' about their 
experiences in a variety of ways, which can feel more inclusive for those who are less capable or less confident in expressing themselves verbally; 3) these 
methods can easily complement other tools presented in this framework, or day-to-day activities in the youth club (for example, an hour-long 1:1 interview might 
be more difficult to embed than 30-minute drawing exercise with a few young people).
1. Youth workers want to understand whether young people have improved their self awareness (Outcome 2.2). There are several ways creative methods can 
be applied for this, for example, a) young people are asked to think about how they see themselves and what do they think are the 3 biggest strengths (2.2b). 
Then they are instructed to spend 30 minutes creating a collage / taking pictures with their phones / drawing / writing a poem (ideally, the method used should 
be the same for all young people but it doesn't have to be). Afterwards, young people share in a group (voluntarily) what they have created and how they see 
themselves. The youth worker facilitates the discussion (particularly to try to understand whether the youth club has had any impact on getting to know oneself) 
and takes notes where possible.
2. As part of a group discussion, youth workers want to understand whether young people have increased their confidence (Outcome 3.2). The youth workers 
prepare a number of visual stimuli (for example, magazine cut-outs) and ask all young people to choose one image that reflects something that they have done 
that they are proud of (3.2c). Young people are asked to share voluntarily in a group what they have chosen and what it means, as well as talking about whether 
it was difficult to think of something they are proud of. The youth worker takes notes where possible, at the same time noting the number of young people who 
seem to feel confident to speak in the group (3.2d).
3. As part of a case study interview, youth workers want to understand whether the youth club has had an impact on young person's connections with others 
(Outcome 4.1, 4.1a question). The young person is asked to draw themselves in the middle first, then to draw some of the people in their lives (family members, 
friends, teachers, anyone else) based on how close they feel to them (the closer to themselves in the paper, the closer the connection); they should connect 
them with arrows which can be of different colours, they can be straight if it's an uncomplicated relationship or jagged if it's a more complicated relationship (e.g. 
with more conflicts). Then the YP is asked to also include people from the youth club. Once the YP is happy with their drawing, youth worker asks them to tell a 
little bit (as much as the YP feels comfortable) about those relationships, both within and beyond the youth club. Additionally, they can ask whether these 
relationships have changed over the last year to see if there have been changes. The youth worker takes notes where possible.
Introduction
ExamplesFinally, for certain outcomes, youth workers can also keep a log over a period of time (e.g. 6 months) to track certain indicators that can be reviewed once in a 
while. For this method, it is important to decide on the indicators in advance, as it might be more difficult to get accurate data retroactively. Observation is useful 
as an additional data point, particularly to compare data collected directly from young people vs. what the youth workers have observed or learned about over a 
period of time. If observation is applied over a few learning 'cycles' (e.g. 2 years), then it will also help observe any changes or tendencies that need addressing.
1. If the youth club already monitors young people's attendance in various activities, some of the indicators can easily be tracked without additional effort from 
the youth workers. These indicators include 1.1c ' Number of YP taking part in sport activities in YO in the last 6/9/12 months ', 2.1b ' Number of YP attending skill-
based workshops or activities within YO in the last 6/9/12 months ', 4.3a ' Number of signposting/referral cases to other services in the community in the last 
6/9/12 months ', and potentially others depending on the youth club's practices. 
2. Some of the suggested indicators might require additional tracking, as to understand the impact, it is also useful to note more informal interactions between 
young people and the youth club or the youth workers. These indicators include 1.2b ' Number of 1:1 conversations with YP around their well-being in the last 
6/9/12 months ', 3.1b ' Number of YP who take responsibilities within the youth club over the last 6/9/12 months ' or 3.3b ' Number of YP who took up new 
opportunities in the last 6/9/12months '. 
3. There are also some indicators that are based on youth workers' subjective perception and are more qualitative methods of observation, requiring youth 
workers to note some examples or specific cases of young people achieving this outcome. For example, 3.2d ' Percentage of YP who speak up and share their 
opinions in a group ' or 4.1h ' YP are able to solve conflicts within YO (with or without YW help) '.
Additionally, all data collected (with any data collection tool) should always be critically reviewed by youth workers, as they often have the best 
insight whether young people are sharing their experiences openly and honestly, or are they experiencing any barriers that might influence their 
answers (e.g., wanting to please the youth workers or feeling peer pressure).
Part 1 (Impact)
1.1
1.2
1.3
Part 2 (General)
2.1What are some of the key lessons for the individual youth workers and organisation as a whole from the last six months?
2.2How can we embed these learnings into our practice in the next six months?
2.3Where do we still have gaps, questions and concerns regarding our work? What do we want to achieve in the next six months?
2.4To what extent are we connecting and collaborating with other YOs? How have (or can) these partnerships improve our offer to YP?
2.5To what extent are young people influencing our activities and work in the organisation? How can we ensure they feel ownership over youth work?
Following these sessions, we suggest writing a summary of the Part 1 of the conversation that can be shared with QLIP. This will help us understand 
what impact is achieved throughout Islington across youth organisations, what are the most common challenges and how can QLIP best support youth 
organisations. It will also help us continuously revise and reflect on the MEL framework and suggested data collection processes.We suggest a following structure for these sessions (which can be adapted to your team's needs and ways of working):As part of using this MEL framework to understand your impact, we also suggest embedding regular learning and reflection spaces within your 
organisations. These spaces can be designed according to the ways of working with your team, and it is up to you and your team how they will be 
delivered and who will lead them. We suggest deciding on the length of these learning cycles in advance and holding space for them every 6, 9 or 12 
months (or another timeline that makes sense for your organisation; in this example, we use 6 months ).
Prior to the learning and reflection session, the team should collate all impact data collected in the last 6 months and bring it to the meeting so it can be 
discussed as a group. 
Reviewing the impact on young people  in the last 6 months : team member(s) share the data they have collected based on the agreed outcomes and 
discuss whether the data reflects their personal views of the young people. Is there anything that 'doesn't sound right?' Is there any impact areas that have 
been observed but are not reflected in the data presented?
Identifying and discussing areas of impact that could be strengthened in the next 6 months . What specific steps can the team take to ensure we achieve 
what we want to achieve? What barriers do we face currently and can we address those? Do we need any external support or expertise?
Discussing data collection processes within the organisation. Have the young people been willing to open up about themselves? Does the team see value 
in understanding the impact better? Which data collection tools did not work or worked particularly well? What other challenges around data collection do 
we face currently and how can we address those?
Informed Consent*
* Adapted from the NSPCC Learning: Research with children: ethics, safety and promoting inclusionWithin this it is important to discuss who the data will be shared with. This should be both who within the organisation will have 
access to the data (e.g. just the youth work team or the whole organisation), what data they will be able to see (e.g. identifiable, 
anonymised or analysed data) and those external to the organisation. This will include discussing that the data in an anonymised 
format will be shared with QLIP and the process by which it will be shared. Please see Tab L for more information on this.QLIP feels it is crucial that young people consent to any data collection in an informed, voluntary and ethical way. Below is some 
suggestions for ways to do this but we encourage all organisations to do their own research and develop their own consent 
processes. 
When you ask for permission for children to be involved in any data collection activities, ensure that children and their parents or 
carers (if needed) fully understand:
- what the activity is about
- how the data will be recorded (e.g. video recordings etc)
- how the data will be stored (e.g. in a password protected excel or on a CRM) and shared (e.g. via a secure server or over email)
- what the data will and wont be used for
- what is expected of participants
- what the risks and benefits of participating in the activity are
- that participating is voluntary.
This is known as informed consent.
If a child doesn’t consent or assent to participate in data collection activity, this overrides the consent from the parent, guardian, 
carer, or other appropriate adult with a duty of care.Make sure you consider children’s capacity to consent to involvement in the activity. This will depend on their level of understanding 
of the potential risks and benefits of taking part.
When considering whether a child is mature enough to make decisions about things that directly affect them, professionals often 
talk about whether the child is ‘Gillick competent’. Gillick competency means a young person is mature enough to fully understand 
what they are agreeing to.
Read more about Gillick competency here. 
If a child isn’t fully able to understand the consequences of taking part, but is able to express willingness to participate and 
understand what is expected of them, it may be appropriate to seek their ‘assent’. In such cases consent should always be sought 
from their parent or carer.
Consent should also be obtained from the parent, carer or other appropriate adult for all children under the age of 8, and in most 
cases for children aged 8-15. For young people aged 16 and 17, you should carefully consider whether parental consent is 
appropriate. If you don’t seek parental consent, you should justify your approach and consider whether parents should be informed 
of the activity.
It is crucial you have a data privacy statement that all those you are collecting evidence from have a chance to read. This will 
explain how the data will be stored and who it will be shared with. This is an example from Mary’s Youth Services.It must be made clear that there are no negative consequences to refusing to take part in the activity and that children or their 
parent or carer can also withdraw consent at any time. You should regularly check with young people and their families during the 
process that they are still happy to take part.
You should have a formal record that consent has been given before the activity starts. Using a consent form enables children to 
confirm they understand what the activity will involve and are happy to take part. You should include all of the above information in 
the consent form and make sure the young people have a copy of this for themselves. It should also include a summary of the data 
privacy policy (see below) and clear instructions where they can access more information on this.
You should keep all participants’ personal information confidential and comply with the Data Protection Act 2018. 
Ethical Research Guidelines
The QLIP Impact Measurement has been designed to adhere to the NSPCC Research Ethics Principles. The Principles have been 
listed below but please go the full guide to learn more about them.
It is important to consider your own principles that adhere to your organisational values and processes when doing any data 
collection activities. The below can act as a guide but should be discussed internally and with the young people to ensure they are 
happy with any data collection activities.
Principle 1: Voluntary participation based on valid, informed, ethical consent
Principle 2: Enabling participation where possible and seeking the inclusion of underrepresented groups 
Please read more about these principles and steps to put them into practice here.Principle 3: Avoidance of personal and social harm to participants and researchers
Principle 4: Non-disclosure of identity and personal information 
Principle 5: Ethical application and conduct of research methods


--- FILE: QLIP-Impact-Session-Plans-Photography.docx ---


Impact Measurement

What are these tools?
To better measure our collective impact, we have developed a new Impact Measurement Framework, which lists key outcome areas and indicators to help us understand the impact of our work. 
We have developed various tools to support youth practitioners to understand their impact on young people. You may have used other tools before, like feedback forms or surveys. These tools are designed to fit better into your existing youth provision, getting young people actively engaged in sharing the impact they have experienced. 
The tools allow you to explore different outcome areas through different methods: 
a case study interview;
a survey, followed by a group debrief; and 
two creative sessions that can be conducted in a group setting.
We hope that these tools will encourage your organisation to explore and understand the impact you have had, and provide you with new evidence around what is working well and what could work even better to align with young people’s needs. 

Important notes
The delivery and reporting of these sessions is completely voluntary, however, by sharing your experiences with QLIP you will contribute to the overall understanding of youth work impact in Islington, as well as help develop better and more accessible impact evaluation processes for other youth organisations.

You are free to adapt the sessions and/or the questions suggested, as long as they relate to the same outcome area and outcomes. We are very happy to provide one-to-one guidance to help you use these tools – click here to set up an informal chat and we can support you to find ways to make the tools work for you and your delivery.

If you have interest and capacity, you are also welcome to use and adapt the QLIP Impact Measurement Framework according to your organisation’s ways of working and existing impact evaluation processes and create your own sessions and tools.

The QLIP Impact Measurement Framework has guidance on consent, data privacy, and ethics with regards to these data collection tools and approaches. It is recommended that you review these in detail and develop your own consent and data privacy protocols as well as ethical guidelines which you would like to use to inform any data collection processes. This should be done prior to beginning any data collection activities.

It is possible that safeguarding concerns may be raised in the course of conducting these activities. Please make sure that whoever is conducting the activity is aware of your organisation’s safeguarding procedures and is ready to support young people who might need it.









Tool 3 – Session on the sense of agency and motivation
Using photography

The third tool in this toolkit adopts a creative evaluation method – photovoice – to encourage young people to explore their sense of agency within and beyond the youth organisation, their confidence in themselves and their goals. We also suggest how to facilitate the conversation following the creative activity in a group setting.

Below are the specific outcomes and indicators that this session was designed to explore:

If you can identify a way to include other indicators, please do so. Have a look through the QLIP Impact Measurement Framework here and adapt questions below.
Introduction
The photo-based activity and the group debrief script provided below should help you explore how young people see themselves within the youth organisations, their overall levels of confidence and aspirations and ambitions. Similarly to other tools, you are free to adapt the activity and the group discussion. 
What you need
Time: You have several different options to deliver this session:
You can give young people a distinct period of time (for example, one hour) to take photographs based on the prompts provided, followed by a group discussion on the same day
Alternatively, you can ask young people to take photographs over a longer period (e.g., one week) and come back to discuss them as a group on an agreed day
Materials: To allow all young people to take photographs, you should consider whether they have and are able to use their phones as cameras. If some young people do not have personal phones or are unable to use them for this purpose, you might want to consider allowing to use phones belonging to the youth centre (under supervision and in line with your e-safety or tech policies); young people can also complete the exercise in pairs sharing one phone (with the consent of those whose phones are being used). 
As another alternative, you may decide to deliver this session using drawings/paintings or another type of creative medium instead of photographs.
Recommended process 
Part 1 – Preparation
At the start of the session, you should inform the young people about the purpose of the activity. You should inform the young people in advance that the session will consist of (1) them taking photographs based on different prompts and (2) sharing their photographs with the peer group and discussing them. They also should be aware that if they do not feel comfortable sharing their photographs with others, they will not have to do that. Stress that participation is totally voluntary and they have the right to skip any or all questions. Finally, follow the consent processes provided by QLIP or your organisation to ensure you get informed consent from the young person.
Part 2 – Photo activity
For the photo activity, invite young people to take three photographs based on these prompts:
My experience at this youth centre
Something I am proud of
My future goal, ambition or dream
After providing them with the prompts, invite them to ask questions and clarify the prompts if they feel they are not clear enough. Where possible, leave room for their own interpretation (especially if you are working with older groups of children and young people), however, if they are struggling with the task, provide them with a space to discuss ideas for their photographs before actually taking them. 
Part 3 – Discussion in a group
For the second part of this session, we suggest bringing the group of young people back together to share their pictures with each other and discuss what has been photographed (ideally, you would be able to show the pictures taken on a projector so everybody can see them at the same time, however, that is not essential). As an additional suggestion, you can invite young people to think of captions for their three pictures.
Although there are different ways to facilitate the group conversation and based on each group different methods might work best, we suggest this structure:
For each of the pictures taken, show the picture to the group so everybody can take a look. It might be best to go through the pictures by themes (e.g., looking at everyone’s ‘experience at the youth centre’, followed by ‘something I am proud of’, etc.); you may also ask young people to select one picture each they want to show to the group (particularly if the group is more than 4-5 people).
Ask the group: What do you think is pictured here? What does this picture make you feel? What questions do you have for the author of this picture? You can be flexible in how to lead this question, however, allow the young people to associate freely. Ensure young people are respectful of each other’s photographs and opinions.
Ask the author: How do you feel listening to the group? What was your original idea for this picture? 
The initial discussion about the pictures should encourage young people to think and reflect about theirs and their peers’ experiences at the youth centre, their confidence in themselves and their future goals. For each of the themes explored, we also suggest additional general follow-up questions that can be posed to the group:
My experience at this youth centre
What has been your favourite memory in this youth centre?
What could make your experience here better? 
Do you feel that youth workers listen to young people’s opinions here? Why or why not?
Do you feel like you are involved in shaping the centre’s activities and day-to-day life? Why or why not? 
Something I am proud of
What or who helped you achieve this and how?
How confident do you feel in yourself? What helps you feel more confident?
How do you feel about trying new things (for example, new activities offered at your youth club)? What helps you to try new things?
Have you tried any new things (for example, new activities offered at your youth club, new hobbies or learning opportunities) in the last year? If so, what were they?
My future goal, ambition or dream
What are some other goals that you have (short- or long-term)? 
Are you working towards them, and if so, how? Do you feel you will be successful in achieving them?
As with other activities, the facilitator should be recording the answers and making notes, particularly about young people’s reflections of how the youth centre and youth workers contributed to their confidence, sense of ownership and goal setting. 



--- FILE: QLIP Website Links.docx ---





--- FILE: QLIP_Program_Details.docx ---

Welcome to QLIP: Quality, Leadership, Impact, and Partnership
In collaboration with London Youth and Mary’s Youth Club, QLIP is committed to offering comprehensive support to youth organisations and practitioners across the borough. Our mission is to deliver high-quality youth work, empower youth workers and organisations, and effectively measure and share the incredible impact of the sector. Together, we aim to achieve outstanding outcomes for the youth of Islington!
Supervision
This program is tailored for Youth Work Managers and Senior Youth Workers (or similar roles) involved in delivering youth work programs and services in Islington. Specifically, it supports practitioners engaged in both direct delivery and line management of staff or volunteers.

Each supervision session lasts one hour and takes place monthly. Supervision provides a reflective space and an organic form of quality assurance, focusing on:
- Safeguarding young people
- Professional development
- Practitioner well-being
Training Opportunities
We offer a range of practical training topics, including:
- Risk assessment
- Planning and delivering off-site activities
- Running residentials
- Public speaking and presentations
and more!
For full details, visit our website. Excitingly, we can also provide bespoke training tailored to your organisation’s needs!
Coffee with QLUP
These informal sessions last between one and two hours and are delivered hybrid for maximum flexibility. Join us while eating lunch or on the go!

These sessions bring together Islington practitioners to share:
- Research
- Professional experience
- Learned expertise
- Ideas, innovation, and collaboration

You can participate in the full session or just pop in for a while!
See our past sessions and resources on our website at qlip.org.uk/coffee.
Impact Measurement
Several tools have been developed in collaboration with Islington providers to help measure the impact of youth work. These tools, along with the latest impact report, are available on our website: www.qlip.org.uk.
How We Can Support You
We’re here to support the fantastic work you’re doing! Invite us for a coffee, a team meeting, or an activity/session.

Contact us via:
- Email
- Phone
- WhatsApp

Or visit our website at www.qlip.org.uk to register your interest.
If you’re not part of the locality WhatsApp groups, let us know, and we’ll send you the links!


--- FILE: QLIP-Impact-Session-Plans-Survey-and-Discussion.docx ---


Impact Measurement

What are these tools?
To better measure our collective impact, we have developed a new Impact Measurement Framework, which lists key outcome areas and indicators to help us understand the impact of our work. 
We have developed various tools to support youth practitioners to understand their impact on young people. You may have used other tools before, like feedback forms or surveys. These tools are designed to fit better into your existing youth provision, getting young people actively engaged in sharing the impact they have experienced. 
The tools allow you to explore different outcome areas through different methods: 
a case study interview;
a survey, followed by a group debrief; and 
two creative sessions that can be conducted in a group setting.
We hope that these tools will encourage your organisation to explore and understand the impact you have had, and provide you with new evidence around what is working well and what could work even better to align with young people’s needs. 

Important notes
The delivery and reporting of these sessions is completely voluntary, however, by sharing your experiences with QLIP you will contribute to the overall understanding of youth work impact in Islington, as well as help develop better and more accessible impact evaluation processes for other youth organisations.

You are free to adapt the sessions and/or the questions suggested, as long as they relate to the same outcome area and outcomes. We are very happy to provide one-to-one guidance to help you use these tools – click here to set up an informal chat and we can support you to find ways to make the tools work for you and your delivery.

If you have interest and capacity, you are also welcome to use and adapt the QLIP Impact Measurement Framework according to your organisation’s ways of working and existing impact evaluation processes and create your own sessions and tools.

The QLIP Impact Measurement Framework has guidance on consent, data privacy, and ethics with regards to these data collection tools and approaches. It is recommended that you review these in detail and develop your own consent and data privacy protocols as well as ethical guidelines which you would like to use to inform any data collection processes. This should be done prior to beginning any data collection activities.

It is possible that safeguarding concerns may be raised in the course of conducting these activities. Please make sure that whoever is conducting the activity is aware of your organisation’s safeguarding procedures and is ready to support young people who might need it.









Tool 2 – Survey on skills and knowledge gained
Survey and group discussion

The second tool combines two activities that can be done with a group of young people: a survey that can be conducted online or on paper, followed by a conversation with the group to explore some of the questions on a deeper level.

Below are the specific outcomes and indicators that this script was designed to explore:

If you can identify a way to include other indicators, please do so. Have a look through the QLIP Impact Measurement Framework here and adapt questions below.
Introduction
The survey and group debrief script provided below should help you explore what skills and knowledge have gained as a result of youth work, as well as how they perceive their personal strengths and learning. Similarly to other tools, you are free to adapt, add or skip questions both for the survey and the group discussion. 
What you need
Time: Approximately 45 minutes for the session (15 mins for the survey + 30 minutes for the discussion in the group)
Materials: Depending on your preferred ways of working, you may decide to conduct the survey online (e.g. young people fill out the survey using their phones or computers at your youth centre) or give out paper-based surveys. You could also ask young people to respond in a more physical way (e.g. going to certain parts of the room) but be aware that this might cause young people to respond differently as the answers are no longer private.
Recommended process 
Part 1 – Preparation
Before the session, we suggest preparing and inviting young people ahead of time: explain what the session will look like, what kind of questions will be asked, why you are interested to hear from them. Stress that participation is totally voluntary and they have the right to skip any or all questions. Finally, follow the consent processes provided by QLIP or your organisation to ensure you get informed consent from the young person.
At the start of the session, reiterate what the survey and the group discussion will be about and the rights that they have. The young people have the right to change their mind at any point and/or not answer any of the questions, if they don’t feel comfortable sharing. 
Part 2 – Suggested survey 
At the start of the survey, we suggest inserting a short written introduction to the activity, for example:
“The first part of today’s session is a short survey, consisting of 10 questions. We would like to hear about the skills and knowledge you have learned at this youth centre, and what else you would like to learn in the future. You can choose to skip any questions that you don’t want to answer. Following this survey, we will also have a conversation as a group. Thank you for agreeing to share your experiences with us!”
How long have you been attending this youth centre? 
Less than 6 months
6 months – 1 year
1 – 3 years
More than 3 years

Since joining, have you learned any of the following skills at this youth centre?
Note: the answer options here should be adapted based on the priorities of your organisation – ask about the specific skills you want to see young people develop.
Teamwork skills
Conflict management skills
Stress management skills
Creativity
Budgeting skills
Healthy eating 
Other (please specify): 

2.1. Can you tell us more about how you learnt these skills?

Now, we would also like to learn more about some of your social and emotional skills:
Do you feel your communication skills have improved as a result of attending your youth club?
Yes
No
Don’t know

3.1 Can you tell us more about why you chose this answer?

How well do you feel you understand other people’s emotions and feelings? 
Rate from 1 to 10.

4.1 Can you tell us more about why you chose this answer?

How well do you feel you understand your own emotions and feelings? 
Rate from 1 to 10.

5.1 Can you tell us more about why you chose this answer?

Is there anything at the moment that you would like to learn, for example, new skills or knowledge areas?
Yes
No
Don’t know

6.1 If yes, what would it be? Where could you learn it?

Part 3 – Group discussion
After young people have completed the survey, we suggest coming back to the group and leading a more open discussion on learning both in and beyond the youth centre. Before starting the conversation, we also would advise asking young people if they had any questions while completing the survey and what did they think about the survey overall.
Some of the other questions for the group discussion could include the below. However, we encourage you to adapt them based on your organisation’s model and priorities.
In general, do you like to learn new skills or about new things? Why or why not? 
What are your favourite ways to learn in the youth centre? 
Do you think youth centres are a good place to learn additional skills and knowledge? Why or why not?
What other skills and knowledge (beyond those you mentioned in the survey) do you think you gained since joining the youth centre? What helped you learn them? 
Do you feel your communication skills (communicating with others) have improved as a result of attending the youth centre? If yes, can you share an example?
Do you feel you understand yourself (your thoughts, feelings, behaviour, likes and dislikes) better as a result of attending the youth centre? If yes, what helped you most to develop this skill? 
How do you feel participating in group activities at the youth centre? Do you now feel more confident than when you first joined or not? Why do you think that might be? 
What are some other things you would like to learn? Could they be learned in the youth centre? 








--- FILE: QLIP-Impact-Session-Plans-Community-Maps.docx ---


Impact Measurement

What are these tools?
To better measure our collective impact, we have developed a new Impact Measurement Framework, which lists key outcome areas and indicators to help us understand the impact of our work. 
We have developed various tools to support youth practitioners to understand their impact on young people. You may have used other tools before, like feedback forms or surveys. These tools are designed to fit better into your existing youth provision, getting young people actively engaged in sharing the impact they have experienced. 
The tools allow you to explore different outcome areas through different methods: 
a case study interview;
a survey, followed by a group debrief; and 
two creative sessions that can be conducted in a group setting.
We hope that these tools will encourage your organisation to explore and understand the impact you have had, and provide you with new evidence around what is working well and what could work even better to align with young people’s needs. 

Important notes
The delivery and reporting of these sessions is completely voluntary, however, by sharing your experiences with QLIP you will contribute to the overall understanding of youth work impact in Islington, as well as help develop better and more accessible impact evaluation processes for other youth organisations.

You are free to adapt the sessions and/or the questions suggested, as long as they relate to the same outcome area and outcomes. We are very happy to provide one-to-one guidance to help you use these tools – click here to set up an informal chat and we can support you to find ways to make the tools work for you and your delivery.

If you have interest and capacity, you are also welcome to use and adapt the QLIP Impact Measurement Framework according to your organisation’s ways of working and existing impact evaluation processes and create your own sessions and tools.

The QLIP Impact Measurement Framework has guidance on consent, data privacy, and ethics with regards to these data collection tools and approaches. It is recommended that you review these in detail and develop your own consent and data privacy protocols as well as ethical guidelines which you would like to use to inform any data collection processes. This should be done prior to beginning any data collection activities.

It is possible that safeguarding concerns may be raised in the course of conducting these activities. Please make sure that whoever is conducting the activity is aware of your organisation’s safeguarding procedures and is ready to support young people who might need it.









Tool 4 – Community Mapping
This tool is focused on understanding the perceptions and connections to the community of children and young people but can also be used to explore feelings of safety, environmental wellbeing and ownership of youth work. 
Below are the specific outcomes and indicators that this tool can be used for:

If you can identify a way to include other indicators, please do so. Have a look through the MEL Framework here and adjust the facilitation questions below.
Introduction
This tool is a creative tool to engage with children and young people about how they feel about their community, the services available to them, where they feel safe and how this affects their wellbeing. It is also used to provide a basis for talking with young people about what is being done, what can be done and what will be done in their community to help support their wellbeing.
This can be done with groups, or as a solo activity. It can be done with drawing or using other techniques including painting or even cut up magazines. 
What you need
Time: Approximately 1.5 hrs including discussion and note taking 
Materials: large sheets of flipchart paper, small cards or sticky notes for ‘future’ pictures, magazines, tape, coloured pens or crayons and a notebook for recording discussions 
Product: A drawing or map which represents the community as it is now and a set of pictures stuck onto the first drawing or map of the community, showing how children and young people would like the community to be different.
Recommended process 
Part 1 - Preparation
At the start of the session, you should inform the young people about the purpose of the activity. You should inform the young people in advance that the session will consist of them speaking about their community and their feelings of safety. They also should be aware that if they do not feel comfortable sharing with their peers, they do not have to. Stress that participation is totally voluntary and they have the right to skip any or all questions. Finally, follow the consent processes provided by QLIP or your organisation to ensure you get informed consent from the young person.
Part 2 – Drawing the ‘present day’ map 
Ask the young people to draw a map of their community. Explain to them they should draw a picture of where things are in their community.
Don’t dictate what they should draw, but, if necessary, give them general guidance to encourage them to include the following: 
things or places that are important in their life and their families’ lives 
things or places where they like to spend time, especially socially 
things or places that are dangerous, worrying or they don’t like 
things or places that are especially important for vulnerable young people, including where they live.
Take a photo of the map for record keeping or keep the map and post it in a place where the young people can see it.
Ask questions based on the facilitation questions below and record their answers.

Part 3 – Drawing the ‘future’ picture 
Ask the young people “What would you like to change in your community to make it better?” and “What is planned or is already changing in your community to make it better?” 
Ask young people to draw these changes on the small cards and stick them onto the relevant places on the map. 
Remind them to include changes that would particularly help the most vulnerable young people. 
Take a photo of the map for record keeping or keep the map and post it in a place where the young people can see it. 
Ask questions based on the facilitation questions below and record their answers.

General
The photos taken during this process can be used as a project baseline. During evaluation cycles, ask young people to repeat the activities in this tool to see how things have changed in their community, and how their ideas and attitudes about what is important to them have changed. Besides giving useful and interesting data, it shows the young people that they have been listened to and their views have been valued. 
This tool can also be used to explore what young people view as assets in their community. ‘Assets’ can be defined as the positive experiences, attitudes, relationships, values, skills, and qualities found in young people, peers, families, schools, and communities. Using facilitation questions, ask young people about the ‘assets’ in their community and they can add these to their maps.



